README.md, before:

![gen3sis](./inst/logo/gen3sis_logo.png)


# General Engine for Eco-Evolutionary Simulations

This is the repository for the R-package of the gen3sis engine [project-gen3sis git](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package).

gen3sis is a spatially-explicit eco-evolutionary mechanistic model with a modular implementation. It allows exploring the consequences of ecological and macroevolutionary processes across realistic or theoretical spatio-temporal landscapes.

gen3sis is licensed under a [GPLv3 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html) deriving from ETHZ 2020 <doi.org/10.5905/ethz-1007-251> and has package authorship according to: http://epub.wu.ac.at/3269/1/Report114.pdf

### How to cite
* O Hagen, B Flueck, F Fopp, JS Cabral, F Hartig, M Pontarp, TF Rangel, L Pellissier (2021) gen3sis: A general engine for eco-evolutionary simulations of the processes that shape Earth’s biodiversity. PLOS Biology. [doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3001340](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001340)


### How to install

gen3sis is avabaile on [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=gen3sis). You can install the latest CRAN release via

```{r}
install.packages("gen3sis")
```

you can also install the latest development release from GitHub via 

```{r}
devtools::install_github(repo = "project-gen3sis/R-package", 
  dependencies = TRUE, build_vignettes = TRUE)
```
Below the status of the automatic CI R-CMD-check tests

DEVELOPMENT [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg?branch=development)](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)

MASTER [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
### How to use

#### Run one simulation

Load and run a simulation with the desired config and landscapes. Exemple data is provided with the package
```{r}
library("gen3sis")

datapath <- system.file(file.path("extdata", "WorldCenter"), package = "gen3sis")

sim <- run_simulation(config = file.path(datapath, "config/config_worldcenter.R"), 
               landscape = file.path(datapath, "landscape"),
               output_directory = tempdir(),
               verbose=0)
```
A summary statistics is stored at 'sim' more data can be save using the oberver function

####  Visualize a simulation

Plot the summary statistics of a simulation
```{r}
plot_summary(sim)
```

#### Check installed version

Make sure you have the latest gen3sis version
```{r}
#print package version
paste("gen3sis version:", packageVersion("gen3sis"))
```

### How to contribute
The main branches of the gen3sis repo are:
*	master
*	development

The master branch should always reflect the state of the current release of gen3sis on CRAN. The development branch contains the working additions/changes to the code that are to be included in the next release.
You should not work on either of these branches directly. Rather, to make changes or work on a new feature, you should create a separate branch off the development branch. While working on your branch, frequently merge changes from development to stay up to date. Once your work is ready, and before you merge your branch into development, make sure to merge any changes from development and verify the code is compiling and tests are passing. Once these checks have been done, create a pull request to merge your branch into development. You can request reviewers for your pull request directly via GitHub. After your pull request is approved, or if it has not been reviewed within 30 days, it will be merged into development. 
The branch hotfix-development exists for small (one commit only) changes that are not worth creating a new branch for (for instance, small bugfixes, readme or help files edits, etc.). A pull request can then be created to merge those changes into development.
New features should never be merged directly into master. Only hotfixes to the current release may be merged into master. For hotfixes, create a separate branch from master, make the fix and verify it, and then merge the hotfix branch into master and development. Similarly to above, the hotfix-master branch exists for small (one commit only) bugfixes to the current release. A pull request can then be created to merge those changes into master and development.
The gen3sis workflow is inspired by the RevBayes workflow: https://revbayes.github.io/developer


### Credits
We thank the developers of the following methods and dependencies:

- **Rcpp** Dirk Eddelbuettel and James Joseph Balamuta (2018). Extending R with C++: A Brief Introduction to Rcpp. The American Statistician. 72(1). URL https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375990.

- **BH** Dirk Eddelbuettel, John W. Emerson and Michael J. Kane (2021). BH: Boost C++ Header Files. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=BH

- **Matrix** Douglas Bates and Martin Maechler (2019). Matrix: Sparse and Dense Matrix Classes and Methods. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Matrix

- **raster** Robert J. Hijmans (2021). raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=raster

- **gdistance** van Etten, J. (2017). R package gdistance: Distances and routes on geographical grids. Journal of Statistical Software, 76(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i13

- **sp** Roger S. Bivand, Edzer Pebesma, Virgilio Gomez-Rubio, 2013. Applied spatial data analysis with R, Second edition. Springer, NY. https://asdar-book.org/

- **stringr** Hadley Wickham (2019). stringr: Simple, Consistent Wrappers for Common String Operations. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=stringr

- **testthat** Hadley Wickham (2011). testthat: Get Started with Testing. The R Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 5--10, https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2011-1/RJournal_2011-1_Wickham.pdf

- **formatR** Yihui Xie (2021). formatR: Format R Code Automatically. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=formatR

- **scico** Crameri, F. (2018). Scientific colour maps. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1243862 & Crameri, F., G.E. Shephard, and P.J. Heron (2020). The misuse of colour in science communication, Nature Communications, 11, 5444. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19160-7

Commit message:

Add CONTRIBUTING.md and update contribution guidelines in README + link
Introduced a CONTRIBUTING.md file with detailed contribution workflow and branch management instructions. Updated the README to provide a concise summary and direct contributors to the new CONTRIBUTING.md for full guidelines. Fix #56

README.md, after:

![gen3sis](./inst/logo/gen3sis_logo.png)


# General Engine for Eco-Evolutionary Simulations

This is the repository for the R-package of the gen3sis engine [project-gen3sis git](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package).

gen3sis is a spatially-explicit eco-evolutionary mechanistic model with a modular implementation. It allows exploring the consequences of ecological and macroevolutionary processes across realistic or theoretical spatio-temporal landscapes.

gen3sis is licensed under a [GPLv3 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html) deriving from ETHZ 2020 <doi.org/10.5905/ethz-1007-251> and has package authorship according to: http://epub.wu.ac.at/3269/1/Report114.pdf

### How to cite
* O Hagen, B Flueck, F Fopp, JS Cabral, F Hartig, M Pontarp, TF Rangel, L Pellissier (2021) gen3sis: A general engine for eco-evolutionary simulations of the processes that shape Earth’s biodiversity. PLOS Biology. [doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3001340](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001340)


### How to install

gen3sis is avabaile on [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=gen3sis). You can install the latest CRAN release via

```{r}
install.packages("gen3sis")
```

you can also install the latest development release from GitHub via 

```{r}
devtools::install_github(repo = "project-gen3sis/R-package", 
  dependencies = TRUE, build_vignettes = TRUE)
```
Below the status of the automatic CI R-CMD-check tests

DEVELOPMENT [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg?branch=development)](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)

MASTER [![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/project-gen3sis/R-package/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
### How to use

#### Run one simulation

Load and run a simulation with the desired config and landscapes. Exemple data is provided with the package
```{r}
library("gen3sis")

datapath <- system.file(file.path("extdata", "WorldCenter"), package = "gen3sis")

sim <- run_simulation(config = file.path(datapath, "config/config_worldcenter.R"), 
               landscape = file.path(datapath, "landscape"),
               output_directory = tempdir(),
               verbose=0)
```
A summary statistics is stored at 'sim' more data can be save using the oberver function

####  Visualize a simulation

Plot the summary statistics of a simulation
```{r}
plot_summary(sim)
```

#### Check installed version

Make sure you have the latest gen3sis version
```{r}
#print package version
paste("gen3sis version:", packageVersion("gen3sis"))
```

### How to contribute

In short, the main branches of the gen3sis repo are:
* **master** – reflects the current CRAN release. Only hotfixes or release-ready changes are merged here, typically just before CRAN submission.
* **development** – serves as the main working branch. All new features, improvements, and fixes should be merged here from separate feature or bugfix branches.

Great that you are contributing! For guidelines on contributing to this project, please refer to the [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md) file.

### Credits
We thank the developers of the following methods and dependencies:

- **Rcpp** Dirk Eddelbuettel and James Joseph Balamuta (2018). Extending R with C++: A Brief Introduction to Rcpp. The American Statistician. 72(1). URL https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375990.

- **BH** Dirk Eddelbuettel, John W. Emerson and Michael J. Kane (2021). BH: Boost C++ Header Files. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=BH

- **Matrix** Douglas Bates and Martin Maechler (2019). Matrix: Sparse and Dense Matrix Classes and Methods. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Matrix

- **raster** Robert J. Hijmans (2021). raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=raster

- **gdistance** van Etten, J. (2017). R package gdistance: Distances and routes on geographical grids. Journal of Statistical Software, 76(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i13

- **sp** Roger S. Bivand, Edzer Pebesma, Virgilio Gomez-Rubio, 2013. Applied spatial data analysis with R, Second edition. Springer, NY. https://asdar-book.org/

- **stringr** Hadley Wickham (2019). stringr: Simple, Consistent Wrappers for Common String Operations. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=stringr

- **testthat** Hadley Wickham (2011). testthat: Get Started with Testing. The R Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 5--10, https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2011-1/RJournal_2011-1_Wickham.pdf

- **formatR** Yihui Xie (2021). formatR: Format R Code Automatically. R package. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=formatR

- **scico** Crameri, F. (2018). Scientific colour maps. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1243862 & Crameri, F., G.E. Shephard, and P.J. Heron (2020). The misuse of colour in science communication, Nature Communications, 11, 5444. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19160-7
